# Samathy's First FOSDEM

Since I was a uni student studying Computer Science  ( beginning 2014 ), I've
wanted to visit the venerable [FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org) conference.  It
happens so early in the year that I never seemed to get around to planning the
trip before the weekend was too close. Plus, it always felt too expensive to go
to as a student, especially if I didn't plan it far enough in advance.

This year, I was organised enough in October to start making motions to plan my
visit.  Both me and my partner Lex went to FOSDEM, and buffered the weekend
with 2 days exploring Brussels.

At least partly by accident, this means I was out of the UK for the 2 most
significant Brexit dates so far (The 2016 referendum result, and the January
31st initial leaving date ). We managed to spend Friday 31st of January 2020
wandering around the EU parliament in Brussels.

Getting to FOSDEM from our Brussels central hotel was easy, although the tram
ride there was absolutely packed with hacker-dudes.

Unfortunately, we missed the welcome talk by a few mins and opted to get in the
queue for T-shirts instead, as I expected they'd sell out in the first morning. 

We also missed the first proper talk I wanted to go to, partly on account of
the university being a bit of a maze, partly on account of my unwillingness to
wander into a talk that'd already started in a hall seating well over 1000
people where the entrance door that we'd found opened right behind the
speaker's podium. 

Anyway, the first morning of FOSDEM was largely a success. I went to most of
the talks I wanted to see, followed by a surprisingly easy lunch affair at the
on-site food vans. 

The afternoon was somewhat less successful, with both me and Lex missing talks
we wanted to see on account some of of the small but popular devrooms either
filling up fast, or just starting full and never emptying. The upside of this
is that I saw a number of talks that I didn't expect to see and actually really
enjoyed. So didn't loose anything really.  Lex discovered the live streaming of
talks that they didn't make it into and watched the talk in the hallway. So all
was not lost, even though the room was full.

We made sure to see as many stalls as we could during the day. I was
particularly excited to see the KDE stand had a PinePhone running KDE Plasma
Mobile especially. 

We left the event fairly early, at about 5:30 due to it being an exhausting day
with so many people and so much rushing around between buildings. 

We ventured back into Brussels central for [Hackerspace Brussels's](https://hsbxl.be) ByteNight
FOSDEM after party, which turned out to be fun as well as a [good chance to see
another Hackspace!](https://nottinghack.org.uk/discovering-hackerspace-brussels/)

Sunday was a later start. I ended up spending the majority of the day in the
Microkernels and Component-OS devroom. Which was a very good idea, as it was
very popular all day and I would probably have not got a seat for the most
interesting talks if I hadn't stayed sat in the same one most of the day.

Lex left earlier on Sunday while I stayed for a talk on PostmarketOS and
lastly, John 'maddog' Hall's talk. The PostmarketOS + Maemo talk inspired me
to dig out the Nokia n900 I got about a year ago and restart researching how to
make it usable.

Both me and Lex learned a lot at FOSDEM, and were exposed to a bunch of
projects we didn't even know might exist! I leave feeling a renewed vigor to
contribute to something. 

We both very much enjoyed FOSDEM and I would recommend anyone interested in
Free and OpenSource software taking a trip at least once.

Be prepared for a, long, draining weekend though. FOSDEM is busy, intense and
exhausting.

Take notes of talks, of course. It's easy to forget what you learned when you
see so much! 

Use the [FOSDEM Companion app](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=be.digitalia.fosdem) if you can.
I also planned my talk options the Friday night before and put them in my
calendar to help visualise what overlapped with what and prioritise what I
wanted to see. 

I would highly recommend avoiding switching rooms as much as possible. It can
take a while to find the next room which can mean missing a talk slot entirely
if it's fill when you arrive, unless another interesting talk is in the same
building. 

If you want a tshirt, get in the queue early to avoid disappointment. K
building tshirt stand had much smaller queues than the J building. 

FOSDEM is live-streamed, and recorded, so not making it into talks you wanted
to see is not the end of the world. Its also a good opportunity to see a talk
that wasn't your first choice!

If you can, especially in the devrooms, sit as close to the front as possible.
The devrooms are small, but the microphones provided by FOSDEM to the speakers
are only for the cameras recording the talk, not amplification. Therefore meek
speakers are very hard to hear.

I'll probably go to FOSDEM again next year, if you're there, say Hi. 
